---
title: A Night of Megillah and Music at Mekor Habracha
date: 2013-02-21 00:00:00 Z
media: Press Release
section: inthenews
link: 
author: Joshua Brett
meta: announces Mekor's 2013 Purim bash
layout: post
---

NEWS RELEASE
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE	CONTACT: Joshua Brett
DATE	Phone: (267) 639-2587
Mobile: (609) 529-7508
E-mail: joshua@joshuabrett.us

Mekor Habracha Center City Synagogue Presents A Night of Megillah and Music
at Annual Purim Festivities
February 23 celebration to feature performance by ‘Moments of Wrong’

Philadelphia, Pa.—Mekor Habracha Center City Synagogue invites the Philadelphia Jewish community to celebrate the holiday of Purim with a night of Megillah and Music. One of the highlights of Mekor Habracha’s calendar, this year’s Purim festivities will take place on Saturday, February 23, at 7:30 p.m. at 2000 Chestnut Street, 2nd floor, in Center City.

Per tradition, attendees are welcome to arrive in costume. The evening will begin with Maariv evening prayers, followed by the reading of the Megillah, the Book of Esther. Noisemakers are also welcome.

After the Megillah reading, attendees will be treated to pizza, a shpiel (a comedic play based on the Purim story) and a performance by one of Philadelphia’s best-kept musical secrets, Moments of Wrong. Formed in 2009 by Mekor Habracha members Jimmy Costello, Jeremy Kriger, Craig Whitman, Jonathan Gradman and Josh Wolf, Moments of Wrong has become a staple of the synagogue’s annual Purim celebration and other events. The band’s current lineup features Kriger, Whitman, Gradman, Saul Rubin and Dave Schwartz.

The Megillah will be read again on Sunday, February 24, following Shacharit morning prayers at 9:00 a.m.

Purim, celebrated on the 14th day of the Jewish month of Adar (or Adar II in leap years), commemorates the story of the Jews of Ancient Persia being saved from extermination. Among the holiday’s traditions are wearing costumes, giving gifts of food to others (mishloach manot), sending gifts to the poor (matanot l’evyonim), jeering and sounding noisemakers when Haman (the Megillah’s villain) is mentioned, and celebrating with a festive meal.

About Mekor Habracha Center City Synagogue
Mekor Habracha Center City Synagogue is a growing, vibrant and diverse Jewish community in Center City Philadelphia. Founded in 2007, Mekor Habracha is now home to over 200 members including graduate students, young professionals, families and empty nesters. Mekor Habracha offers daily morning services, traditional Shabbat and holiday services, Talmud study sessions and other activities for people of all ages and Jewish backgrounds. For more information, visit www.ccshul.com.