---
title: "Sermon Va'Etchanan 8.5.17: Lucky Man"
date: 2017-08-27 00:00:00 Z
section: rabbisdesk
link:
author: Rabbi Eliezer Hirsch
media:
meta:
expires_on:
frontpage: true
layout: post
---
This Shabbat, which follows Tisha B’av, is famously called Shabbat
Nachamu, the Shabbat of Consolation, receiving its name from
the first words of the Haftorah, the prophecy of ישעיהו, &quot;Nachamu
Nachamu Ami&quot;, “My nation”, God decries, “be consoled, be
consoled”. The custom, derived from the פסיקתא דרב כהנא, is
that every summer we have 3 Shabbatot of tragedy, תלתא
דפורענותא, followed by שבעה דנחמתא or 7 weeks of consolation,
leading up to Rosh Hashanah.

Many people ask me about משיח during this time of year. What
will it be like during the time of משיח? Will I see my loved ones?
Will Starbucks and Whole Foods continue to operate? And of
course, the age-old question, when is משיח coming already? The
only honest answer I can give to these questions is “I really don’t
know!”, because by design, we are not supposed to know. As we
have frequently discussed, “Malchut” or God’s trait of “Kingship”,
which corresponds to the era of משיח, must emerge
spontaneously. For example, the language of שום תשים עליך מלך
that you shall place a king upon yourselves, is not so much a
commandment as much as a fact that will simply occur naturally.
The emergent era of משיח is therefore inherently unpredictable in
every aspect. Nonetheless, if it makes any difference, I am
extremely confident that it will be a wonderful time for everyone,
and whether we will enjoy the Messianic Era is not something we
need to be concerned about.

Going through this process, year after year, is not easy, and it at
times feels monotonous and uselessly repetitive.  I frequently tell
the now well-known story about the summer camp where the
camp administration wanted to make Tisha B’av vivid, to have
their campers experience the loss we suffered 2,000 years ago.

They asked the kids to build a model of the Temple in Jerusalem,
and the campers poured their heart and soul into this project and
completed it after several weeks of hard work. Then on the night
of Tisha B’Av, a fire was “accidentally” started that burned the
whole thing down. According to staff members I spoke to, the
part of the story that was untold was that some kids were so
distressed, the camp had to bring in mental health professionals
to provide trauma counseling for them.  Is this what we must
come down to, in trying to teach ourselves and our children to
appreciate the loss of our Temple?

I have always believed that the loss of the Beit Hamikdash can be
conveyed without resorting to such desperate measures.  We ALL
experience loss – it is inevitable.  Every single one of us will
eventually experience a devastating loss in our individual lives –
the loss of a relative, the end of a relationship, the loss of a job. 
The list goes on. We don’t need to go back in time 2,000 years to
experience heartbreaking loss.

If we are honest and treat the Torah as something real, we will
understand that every time we lose something precious, it is the
natural, inevitable outcome of being in Exile.  I’m not saying that
life will be perfect when משיח comes, for the Rambam rules
according to the opinion that it will not be perfect at all.  Nonetheless, it’s important to recognize that being in Exile means
that God is hidden from us, and bad things will occur. It means
that the Jewish people are not in a good place, individually and
collectively.  The purpose of this time of year is to teach us that
loss is an inescapable aspect of our lives and to show us how to
grapple with it.

The introductory תלתא דפורענותא, 3 Shabbatot of tragedy, mean
that first, we must accept our loss – face it and mourn for what
we’ve lost, as we do on Tisha B’av.  Only then can we move on to
the next phase, which is Nechama/consolation -- picking up the
pieces and forging ahead. We only have 3 weeks of tragedy, but 7
weeks of consolation, perhaps because after mourning, it takes
much longer to move on and return to our productive lives. 
That’s why the word “Nechama” has a double meaning: It also
means “to change your mind”, to reconsider.  As when the Torah declared “ &quot;וינחם ה&#39; על הרעה אשר דבר לעשות לעמוthat God
changed His mind and decided not to destroy the Jewish nation
after the Golden Calf, or when He regretted creating Man, &quot;וינחם
ה&#39; כי עשה את האדם בארץ&quot; and so He brought the Flood.  In other
words, changing the way you think is the essence of consolation. 
Ironically, we oftentimes become stuck in a certain way of
thinking until we experience a terrible loss. So even though we
certainly don’t want bad things to happen, at the end of the day,
loss can pave the way to life-changing accomplishments.

On this note, I would like to share news with the congregation
that some of you already know. Some years ago, I was diagnosed
with Young Onset Parkinson’s Disease, which you may recall is the
same malady that actor Michael J. Fox has. For a long time, I kept
this information private, because I was concerned that people
would see me differently or even pity me.  Some of you may have
personal experience with Parkinson’s, or for TV addicts, you may
be familiar with Louis Canning from “The Good Wife” or Terry
from “Ray Donovan”. If not, Young Onset Parkinson’s disease is a
long-term degenerative disorder of the central nervous system
that mainly affects the motor system. It is known as a movement
disorder and produces a long list of symptoms. Barring a medical
breakthrough, my current physical condition is the best I will ever
function at and currently there is no cure.

At the same time, I personally find deep inspiration in Michael J.
Fox, as well as from my Rebbe, the Mirrer Rosh Yeshiva, Rabbi
Nosson Tzvi Finkel of blessed memory, with whom I was
serendipitously very close. Rabbi Finkel zt’l suffered from late
stage Young Onset Parkinson’s Disease for most of his tenure,
when he led the prestigious yeshiva during its most prolific
period, as it became the largest yeshiva in the world. Both of
these incredibly accomplished individuals never lost focus and
committed to becoming even more accomplished with this
disease than they had ever imagined prior to their diagnosis.

Following their example, I intend to continue working to achieve
aspirations I have for myself personally, as well as for our Mekor
community. As I discussed in the dvar Torah, I will try to
continually accept this diagnosis, and move on to the stage of
Nechama, so that I can change my situation into something
positive.

I want to primarily thank my wife Miriam, who has been a one-
person support system from the outset of my diagnosis. She
ensures that I do not stagnate, which is a vital component of
Parkinson’s treatment. I would also like to thank my family, the
Mekor Board of Directors, and everyone both within and outside
the congregation who have staunchly supported me, including by
respecting my privacy, no matter how curious they were or how
much concern they had.  I hope that you will continue to support
me in this manner and remember that while Parkinson’s disease
will affect my life in many ways, it will never define me. 
I feel privileged to serve our amazing, flourishing Mekor
community, and with the help and love of God, I will continue to
believe, as Michael J. Fox expressed with the title of his bestselling
memoir, that for everyone and everything I am blessed with in my
life, I consider myself to be a “Lucky Man”.  Shabbat shalom.
